---
layout: post
date: 2012-05-18 12:00:00
title: For King And Country
---

As I write this, “Don’t Ever Come Back” is the headline on [the Huffington Post](http://www.huffingtonpost.com). It refers, (not quite correctly), to proposed legislation from two U.S. Senators following the move from Facebook co-founder Eduardo Saverin to renounce his US citizenship. (For reference, Eduardo Saverin was the one played by Andrew Garfield in The Social Network). This move will save Saverin a reported $67 Million in potential taxes as Facebook goes public. Some Americans seem to have taken Saverin’s decision to leave as a personally offensive. Slate’s [Farhad Manjoo](http://pandodaily.com/2012/05/12/what-eduardo-saverin-owes-america-hint-nearly-everything/) wrote, "It’s ungrateful and it’s indecent. Saverin’s decision to decamp the U.S. suggests he’s got no idea how much America has helped him out."

<!-- more -->

The American pride, the American attitude of “America number one” is at once amazing and disturbing. Visiting the country in 2010, every house had a the Stars and Stripes proudly waving outside it, even in the staunchly Democratic Maryland. As my then American girlfriend explained, the flag is just "what you do". You don't publically chastise America, watch [the trailer](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wC8ovJYAU3U) for Aaaron Sorkin’s HBO series The Newsroom, where fiction cable news anchor Jeff Daniels tells a student some home truths "When you ask what makes us the greatest country in the world, I don't know what the fuck you're talking about!"

Generally if you ask an American if they love their country, the answer is yes, ‘Hell Yes!’ But here in the UK, I don’t believe you would get the same response. I’m British, but I don’t “love” my country. This is 2012 however, the year of the United Kingdom. The London 2012 Olympics, the Royal Jubilee, at the moment it is impossible to go into a supermarket without seeing the union jack adorning t-shirts, lunchboxes, (and weirdly in my local Sainsbury’s), BBQ sets. I forget who made this line first, but seeing union jacks everywhere makes the country look like a giant BNP rally.

I love, (perhaps not the best word- support, defend, hold great affection for), some things that are British, The BBC, the NHS, Wallace and Gromit. But the Queen? No. An anachronistic relic of our feudal past. Back in 2005, Michael Howard wrote that multicultural integration has been a failure and that not enough has been done to emphasise the merits of "Britishness". It is time, he said, to move away from so much "attachment to other traditions" and to promote instead what he called "the British Dream". In the words of Jeff Daniels, “I don't know what the fuck you're talking about!"

What is ‘Britishness’? A love of Cricket? The passion for queuing? An impulse to plant flags in brown people’s countries? Last October David Cameron unveiled changes planned to the Life in the UK citizenship test, which must be taken by all those seeking indefinite leave to remain or who apply for a British passport. The Guardian wrote a [short quiz](http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/blog/quiz/2011/oct/11/uk-citizenship-test-quiz) with a questions taken from the Official Practice Citizenship Test. As I noted [at the time](http://log.adamwilcox.org/post/11429562663/uk-citizenship-test), I scored 13 out of a possible 24. The pass mark was 75% and according to the Life in the UK Test, I have “insufficient knowledge of the English language or of life in the UK to remain”. I was born in the UK, I have the privilege of being white, heterosexual, middle class, university educated; in terms of British cultural life I have it easy, the system is set up for me to succeed, yet I failed the Citizenship Test, I will not be holding a street party to mark the Jubilee or proudly backing ‘Team GB’.

The mantra of America has always been it is a place where anyone can grow up to be president. Here in the UK, I won’t be the head of state, I can’t, my parents weren’t the *right* parents. This summer, as the union jack is beamed around the world, this is when we should be asking what it stands for. Why should I have pride in the accidental location of my birth?